During the first week of this course,
we built a suite of 15
elementary logic gates.
And in the next week of the course, we're
going to take this basic functionality and
use it in order to build
some more interesting and
powerful chips like adders and
arithmetic logic unit.
Now whenever we teach this course
every week of instruction,
there's a whole set of issues and
questions that come up
about different aspects of building
hardware and software systems.
So we've decided to devote the last unit
of each week to answer such questions.
And we are calling this unit this last
unit every week a perspective unit.
So here are the questions that
typically come up at the end of
this unit in which we deal
with elementary logic gates.
So the first question of the day is is it
possible to build a computer starting
with a logic gate other than NAND?
Well I'll take this question and
the answer is indeed yes, it's possible.
For example, you can use another
elementary gate called NOR, which stands
for not or, and base your entire
computer on this atomic building block.
Likewise, it is quite natural to start
with the suite consisting of and,
or and not gates and
use them to build a system.
And there are a number
of other possibilities.
And in fact it's quite similar to
the way geometry can be founded
on different sets of axioms.
And each one of them can be yet
another point of departure to build,
you know, all the power and
theorems of geometry.
This is not such a bad analogy.
However, it turns out that NAND gates
are very popular in physical
implementations of hardware systems.
Because there are many integrated circuit
technologies in which it is quite cheap or
relatively cheap to build NAND gates.
As you well know during
the course during the first week,
we treated these NAND gates
as black box abstractions.
So, the next question, which is directly
related to the first one, is well,
if you actually had to build a,
a NAND gate, how would you go about it?
Norm, maybe you can answer this question.
>> Okay so, in this course we sort of made
a point of not going into this question.
Because we feel that is already physics or
electronics, rather than computer science.
But still, let us see an example.
There are of course many different
technologies to implement and navigate and
as in any other gate.
But let me show you,
let me show you the simplest example,
if you wish, of such an implementation.
So here is an NMOS
implementation of a NAND gate.
[NOISE] We have a plus voltage,
which is going to be one, our logical one.
And the minus voltage,
which is our logical zero, and
we're going to connect them as follows.
A little resistor here which is a wi
connection, and then two nice transistors,
NMOS transistors,
which we connect this way.
This is going to be our a input, and
this is going to be our b input.
And this is going to be our output.
So these are the two
transistors that we have.
So how does this implementation work?
The basic functionality of one of these
endmost transistors, is that whatever that
input gate has, gets high voltage,
then it connects the two other terminals.
If it gets a negative voltage inside,
it disconnects the two terminals.
So let's see what happens.
If both a and b are one, then we get
the high voltage here, high voltage here.
These two terminals are connected
by this transistor.
So we get the connection all the way
from the output, to negative.
And since this is a weak connection and
this is a strong connection, our output
is going to be negative or zero.
As we want in a NAND gate, because when
a NAND gets one and one as inputs,
it gets zero as output.
In any other case, one of these two
inputs is going to be negative,
which means a low voltage.
That when these two connected to
the low variable of voltage input,
it's going to disconnect
the two terminals.
In which case,
there is not going to be a connection
from the minus sign to the output.
And so, this weak connection to the plus
is the one that's going to rule, and
we're going to get the plus output, which
is exactly what we want in a NAND gate,
which is two.
So, this is a NMOS
implementation of a NAND gate.
There are many other technologies.
This one is not used so
much anymore, since the 70s or 80s.
And the important thing in this course is,
we do not care about the technology.
We do not care neither about
this implementation or
if there are any other implementation.
We want to abstract that away,
away inside of gates that get true and
false and output true and false and
we don't care how exactly.
>> So welcome back from the world
of resistors and transistors.
And once again,
this is a level of detail that we are not
going to get into in this course.
So here's the next question that we have.
And it's about hardware description
languages, and, the question is.
How does the HDL that we used in
this course, and in this week,
how does it compare to real HDL languages
that hardware engineers normally use?
Well first of all, our HDL is a very
real language, because you can use it to
design computers and simulate computers,
and that's what HDLs are all about.
At the same time obviously, industrial
strength HDL languages like Verilog and
VHDL are far more complex and
powerful than our HDL.
Typically they have
a syntax which is some mix
of the HDL that we use and something that
looks like the C programming language.
And they feature all sorts of high level
programming constructs, like For and
While, which eliminate the need to
write a lot of repetitive HDL code.
So it's very nice to
use these capabilities.
And they also feature
like our language does,
they feature the ability to model and
simulate the notion of time and clocks.
Without which, you wouldn't be
able to build sequential logic.
You know, logic that ends up with which,
with which you end up building things like
memories and and counters, and so on.
So these languages are very nice.
At the same time,
they are quite complicated and
would, it would take you at
least a month or so to master
the these languages in order to begin
writing some code for this course.
So as an alternative, Norm and I decide
to, decided to design a very simple
dialect or very simple version of HDL and
offer it to you.
It has all of the capabilities
that we need in order to build
the computer that we will build in this
course, and you can learn it in one hour.
The next question, which is for Norm,
is as follows the chips that we built so
far were quite simple.
How does one go about designing complex
chips containing hundreds of parts and
connections?
>> Well, the truth is [COUGH] that there
is no simple general way of designing
complex circuits.
It's really a complicated
design challenge, and
you need human ingenuity to do it well.
Now there are many techniques that
you learn in in digital circuit
digital circuit construction courses.
For example, there are techniques for
card no maps that allows you to optimize
a gate with a small number of inputs.
Sometimes you can use various tools.
For example,
there are so-called silicon compilers,
where you specify what
the functionality is that you want.
And the silicon compiler already
has inside it a lot of logic and
a lot of algorithms that
can optimize gates for you.
But again, this is,
it is not perfect algorithms.
These are all heuristics because the
general problem of so-called NP complete,
you cannot find a computer
program that does it perfectly.
The real answer is,
is that after all these tools and
all these techniques and so
on, at the end of the day,
you use the usual tools of computer
science modularity and abstraction.
You break a complex problem
into simpler parts, and
the simpler parts are simpler
to optimize and to construct.
And at the end of the day,
after you use all your tools,
after you use all your techniques, you go
back and use this modularity at the idea.
>> So these were the questions that
we chose to focus on in this first
perspective unit of week one.
As you can see, this particular format
of the perspective unit is open-ended.
There are numerous
questions that can come up.
Once again, we don't want to deal with
the level of transistors and resistors.
You know, this is something that
belongs to electrical engineering.
We want to focus on computer science.
And when it comes to hardware
technologies and so on,
there are many questions that Norm and
I cannot answer either.
So we are we welcome any
questions that can come up.
You can post these questions
on the course Q&A forum.
And if there are other students who are
who have some knowledge about these areas
you are perfectly welcome to go to the Q &
A forum of the website of this course and
answer these questions on your own.